---
layout: post
title: "Silence = Death"
---

#Coming Out

In many ways this is a "coming out" post, and I am uncertain of the reaction of many of my acquaintances, particularly my professional colleagues. But as the AIDS-advocacy movement has warned for years (where I take the title of this post from), I believe strongly that hiding dangerous conditions just because they are stigmatized, or especially when they are stigmatized, it itself very dangerous.

I am a recovered alcoholic. For me, this means I have not had to take a drink for over four years. Before that, I spent about ten years (at least) not being able to choose whether to drink or not at any given time, and suffering under varying levels of physical, mental, spiritual, and social torment caused by that predicament. I am in long-term recovery, thanks to a fellowship and a spiritual program of recovery, and thanks to this program, I am very grateful (and fortunate) to say that I live my day-to-day life with very few negative effects of the very dangerous illness of alcoholism. There is a catch, of course: there are things I have to do daily, for the rest of my life, in order to continue to continue to enjoy this happy state of affairs where most symptoms of my illness are all but forgotten (and they take up a lot of time). That is the deal I get, I wouldn't exchange it for any other life on Earth, and I am so unbelievably lucky that my illness is so treatable.

(Any more detail about treatments for alcoholism would have to be the subject of another post, but please get in touch if you know someone who might benefit from this information.)

#Why Come Out Publicly?

As Larry Kramer once shouted into an ACT-UP meeting that had lost its focus, "PLAGUE!" Lots of people die from alcoholism, and addiction in general, and we need to talk about it more in order to address it at all. It's also not a nice death. I've seen it, up close and personal, and your skin, eyes, and mouth turn a dark greenish yellow, before your organs start to fail while your mind is tortured with hallucinations. There are no functional alcoholics, by the way, not really, and not in the long-term: it is a progressive illness and always arrives at the end stage if untreated (if the person continues drinking), unless you die of violence, suicide, or some acute complication of alcoholism first. And many people die of it without knowing that there is a treatment, and often die without their *doctors* knowing there's a treatment. Sometimes medical, and even *mental health*, professionals don't even know what the symptons look like. But no one will know these things if everyone is too afraid of the stigma to speak out about it.

But who is going to do the speaking out, if not us alcoholics and addicts who have been successfully treated, and so have been fortunate enough to recover from this dangerous syndrome?

A related point: Since I got sober, I've been very active in helping a number of other alcoholics stop drinking and stay sober, an activity which is part of my own recovery. I've noticed how little help standard medical and social services often are regarding addiction and other mental health issues. I recently spoke to an old friend of mine who has noticed a similar lack of knowledge, and sometimes respect, among medical professionals for the conditions of anxiety and depression. Still other close friends have experienced problems with PTSD and gender issues. We all more or less agree that: 1) there would be better services in place if there were greater awareness of how many people suffer from various mental health issues, and 2) there would be better awareness if more people talked more openly about what they've been going through, and attacked the stigma associated with these conditions head-on.

So, we naturally thought of the LGBTQ movement and the important role of "coming out" as, in addition to being an important personal step, an important political tactic to heighten awareness and build support for a broad social movement (take a look at Randy Shilts' excellent book [The Mayor of Castro Street](http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=P_2f521UkFIC&dq=The+mayor+of+castro+street&hl=en&sa=X&ei=EWQHU6-YKur07Aa7woGoBQ&redir_esc=y) for a discussion of the early days of that movement. I would also note that the LGBT-rights movement must be one of the most successful social movements in history, along with AA, in terms of spreading far and wide and achieving some of its goals in a short timespan. See [George Lakey's excellent article](http://wagingnonviolence.org/feature/lessons-from-the-lgbt-equality-movement/) comparing the success of LGBT-equality compared to other movemenets.)

Coming out lets friends, family, colleagues know that an issue affects someone they know personally, not just "those people" who they might not identify with. It is a particularly important tactic for "camouflaged minorities" (a term I learned from @wordgeeksarah), stigmatized or oppressed groups which are able to "pass" as non-members of their group. So just as coming out has been important for LGBTQ-equality, we think it could work the same way for issues like depression or alcoholism. And we are [not alone](http://www.time-to-change.org.uk/).  
(See also [Faces and Voices of Recovery](http://www.facesandvoicesofrecovery.org/) for coming out specifically in relation to recovery from addiction.)

#A Final Note

If anyone who knew me through these times is thinking, "I knew you back then, and you were weren't doing too bad...you're not a real alcoholic"...believe me, I am. I was in real danger for a long period of time, and I am very fortunate to be alive and healthy today. Note that keeping work under some amount of control, or seemingly intellectually with it is not a sign of mental health or lack of addiction; we addicts are strong-willed people, often capable of rather incendiary will-power in order to get up for work with a hangover, feeling nauseous, sweaty, and having panic-attacks throughout the day...every day, and still *seem* to hold it together. It makes it all the more striking that our will-power is useless against our addictions themselves; when it comes, as it did for me, the power to overcome addiction comes from elsewhere.